README.md, before:

# nodejs-todo

<h2> A simple To Do List application built with Node.js and Express</h2>

<p> Nodejs application that let's you add and complete task on a single page, storing both new and completed task in a different array. This appllication makes use of: </p>

<ul>
<li> EJS - A simple templating engine that lets you generate HTML markup with plain JS </li>

<li> Body-parser - This extracts the entire body portion of an incoming request stream and exposes it on req.body </li>
</ul>

![png](https://github.com/missating/nodejs-todo/blob/master/todo.png?raw=true 'web todo')

<br>

<p> How to run the app locally: </p>

<ol>
<li> Run <code> npm install </code> to install all needed dependencies </li>

<li> Then start the server using <code> node index.js </code> </li>

<li> Navigate to your browser <code> http://localhost:3000/ </code> to view the app </li>
</ol>

<p> I wrote a blog post on how to build this app, you can check it out <a href="https://medium.com/@atingenkay/creating-a-todo-app-with-node-js-express-8fa51f39b16f" target="_blank">Here</a>

## Mongo Integration
Tasks added by the user is persisted in Mongo database. Any task marked as completed is updated accordingly in the database.

Below is the schema of the collection
```
taskSchema : {
    _id: <mongo_generated_id>,
    name: String,
    completed: Boolean
}
```

Mongo instance is run inside a docker container on port 27017. Data is persisted on the host machine
by specifying the volume while running the mongo container.

```
docker run -itd -v tododata:/data/db mongo
```

Here tododata is the docker volume created using the below command:
```
docker volume create tododata
```

## Todo-Node-App
App has been updated to add/udpate the tasks to Mongo database. This application uses mongoose to perform save/update/find operations.

Mongo host is read from the node environment variable mongoHost and mongoPort.
Default values:
```
mongoHost = localhost
mongoPort = 27017
```

This application is also run inside a docker container.

Image of this application is built on top of Node image (OS + Node). Configuration for the same can be found in dockerfile.

```
git clone git@github.com:pavanpalakshamurthy/nodejs-todo.git
cd nodejs-todo
docker build . --tag pavanp2/todo-node-app:<version>
```

Latest image is available in dockerhub. The same can be pulled using the below command
```
docker pull pavanp2/todo-node-app
```

Before running the application, Mongo docker instance should be up and running. By inspecting
the container, we should be able to retrieve the IP of the mongo container as below
```
docker inspect <mongo_container_id> | grep "IPAddress"
```

### Running mongo instance
Step #1
Pull the latest mongo image from the dockerhub.
```
docker pull mongo
```

Step #2
Create volume on the host machine
```
docker volume create <volume-name>
```

Step #3
Run the mongo container
```
docker run -itd -v <volume-name>:/data/db mongo
```
Now the mongo instance should be up and running and ready to accept connections.

Step #4
Run the inspect on the mongo container to determine the container IP address.
```
docker inspect <mongo-container-id> | grep "IPAddress"
```

### Running the application
Step #1
Build the image from the source code
```
git clone git@github.com:pavanpalakshamurthy/nodejs-todo.git
cd nodejs-todo
docker build . --tag pavanp2/todo-node-app:<version>
```

Step #1.1 (if Step #1 not executed)
Pull the todo node app image directly from dockerhub
```
docker pull pavanp2/todo-node-app:latest
```

Step #2
List all the images available locally. 
```
docker images
```
Recently built/pulled image should be visible in the list.

Step #3
Run the application
```
docker run -itd -p 3000:3000 -e mongoHost="<mongo-container-ip>" pavanp2/todo-node-app
```
{mongo-container-ip} is from the step #4 of the previous section. Application is run as daemon.
Logs of the application can be viwed using the below command
```
docker logs <todo-node-app-container-id>
```

Step #4
View all the running containers
```
docker ps
```
This should list both mongo instance and the todo app instance.

### Accessing the application
In the browser
```
localhost:3000
```

Commit message:

add image and updates README with docker compose instructions

README.md, after:

# nodejs-todo

<h2> A simple To Do List application built with Node.js and Express</h2>

<p> Nodejs application that let's you add and complete task on a single page, storing both new and completed task in a different array. This appllication makes use of: </p>

<ul>
<li> EJS - A simple templating engine that lets you generate HTML markup with plain JS </li>

<li> Body-parser - This extracts the entire body portion of an incoming request stream and exposes it on req.body </li>
</ul>

![png](https://github.com/missating/nodejs-todo/blob/master/todo.png?raw=true 'web todo')

<br>

<p> How to run the app locally: </p>

<ol>
<li> Run <code> npm install </code> to install all needed dependencies </li>

<li> Then start the server using <code> node index.js </code> </li>

<li> Navigate to your browser <code> http://localhost:3000/ </code> to view the app </li>
</ol>

<p> I wrote a blog post on how to build this app, you can check it out <a href="https://medium.com/@atingenkay/creating-a-todo-app-with-node-js-express-8fa51f39b16f" target="_blank">Here</a>

# Updates

## Mongo Integration
Tasks added by the user is persisted in Mongo database. Any task marked as completed is updated accordingly in the database.

Below is the schema of the collection
```
taskSchema : {
    _id: <mongo_generated_id>,
    name: String,
    completed: Boolean
}
```

Mongo instance is run inside a docker container on port 27017. Data is persisted on the host machine
by specifying the volume while running the mongo container.

```
docker run -itd -v tododata:/data/db mongo
```

Here tododata is the docker volume created using the below command:
```
docker volume create tododata
```

## Todo-Node-App
App has been updated to add/udpate the tasks to Mongo database. This application uses mongoose to perform save/update/find operations.

Mongo host is read from the node environment variable mongoHost and mongoPort.
Default values:
```
mongoHost = localhost
mongoPort = 27017
```

This application is also run inside a docker container.

Image of this application is built on top of Node image (OS + Node). Configuration for the same can be found in dockerfile.

```
git clone git@github.com:pavanpalakshamurthy/nodejs-todo.git
cd nodejs-todo
docker build . --tag pavanp2/todo-node-app:<version>
```

Latest image is available in dockerhub. The same can be pulled using the below command
```
docker pull pavanp2/todo-node-app
```

Before running the application, Mongo docker instance should be up and running. By inspecting
the container, we should be able to retrieve the IP of the mongo container as below
```
docker inspect <mongo_container_id> | grep "IPAddress"
```

### Manually running mongo instance
Step #1
Pull the latest mongo image from the dockerhub.
```
docker pull mongo
```

Step #2
Create volume on the host machine
```
docker volume create <volume-name>
```

Step #3
Run the mongo container
```
docker run -itd -v <volume-name>:/data/db mongo
```
Now the mongo instance should be up and running and ready to accept connections.

Logs of the mongo can be viwed using the below command
```
docker logs mongo
```

### Manually running the application
Step #1
Build the image from the source code
```
git clone git@github.com:pavanpalakshamurthy/nodejs-todo.git
cd nodejs-todo
docker build . --tag pavanp2/todo-node-app:<version>
```

Step #1.1 (if Step #1 not executed)
Pull the todo node app image directly from dockerhub
```
docker pull pavanp2/todo-node-app:latest
```

Step #2
List all the images available locally. 
```
docker images
```
Recently built/pulled image should be visible in the list.

Step #3
Run the application
```
docker run -itd -p --name todoapp 3000:3000 --link mongo:mongo pavanp2/todo-node-app
```
-d switch runs the application in daemon mode.
--link switch links containers running within the same network. By default both
mongo instance and todo instance run on bridge network.

Logs of the application can be viwed using the below command
```
docker logs todoapp
```

Step #4
View all the running containers
```
docker ps
```
This should list both mongo instance and the todo app instance.

### Accessing the application
In the browser
```
localhost:3000
```

### Docker compose
Start the application
Pulls images, creates volume & mounts, and runs both mongo and todo app containers in daemon mode
```
docker-compose up -d
```

Stop the application
```
docker-compose down -d
```
